people began to notice these lovable
creatures displaying some very
disturbing behavior
[Music]
we've been filmed actually pulling off
their own arms people have seen arms
basically crawling away from the body
this behavior has spread along the whole
Pacific coast from Alaska to Mexico and
at least 20 different species of sea
star are tearing themselves to pieces
losing limbs left right and center and
if that's not unsettling enough that
attached arms then seem to take on a
life of their own
they're almost like zombies so what's
taken over these adorable invertebrates
and turned them into the Walking Dead
well there are over 2,000 species of sea
star worldwide many of them have the
familiar five arms but they can have
many more like this massive meter-wide
sunflower starfish arranged around a
central disc every limb is identical and
contains their vital organs their
underside is covered in flexible tube
feet that they use to move around the
seabed and pass food into their mouths
despite having no brain or bones sea
stars have some amazing superpowers
[Music]
for a start they can see with their arms
each limb has an eye spot that's
sensitive to light they can also spit
out their stomach
wrap it around their prey to dissolve it
and then to digest it but what's driving
these sea stars to pull themselves apart
Melissa Redfield and her colleagues at
the University of California and Santa
Cruz are trying to figure out what's
going on sea stars losing their arms all
over the place and crawling away is
pretty terrifying if you imagine that
that was some sort of animal on lands
losing its arm and crawling away you
know it would be quite frightening and a
lot more obvious than what's going on
out in the ocean
although it looks scary several animals
including lizards and slow worms can
remove parts of their body with no ill
effects if threatened by a predator they
quickly shed their tails to avoid
getting caught
it's called otter Tomi and sea stars
have a similar ability if one of their
limbs is nabbed by a predator they can
simply regrow a new one
in fact they can lose up to
three-quarters of their body and still
survive some sea stars have taken this
one step further you see as long as a
small portion of the central disc
remains they can completely regenerate
from a single arm but this doesn't
explain the strange phenomenon on the
west coast of America
these starfish are dropping their arms
with no sign of danger nearby
well sea stars have one final trick up
their sleeve a few species reproduce
this way simply splitting in half to
make two individuals so could the
starfish that appear to be whipping off
their own arms actually be creating new
life unfortunately not thousands of sea
stars are disintegrating and dying
littering the seabed along the whole
Pacific coast in November 2014
biologists announced that they found the
culprit
causing all of this devastation it was a
newly discovered virus sea star
associated denser virus I say it's a
newly discovered virus but in fact
subsequent investigation of museum
specimens show that it's been knocking
around since the 1940s the trouble is no
one knows why it's causing this
horrendous outbreak right now although
the disease is killing off many sea
stars it may not be a total disaster we
do have a little glimmer of hope which
is that this past spring and summer we
have seen a big influx of juveniles is
likely because when many animals are
stressed as a sort of last-ditch efforts
to keep the population going they'll
reproduce we won't know the final impact
of this virus for some time but we can
only hope that nature's resilience
overcomes this disease
[Music]